{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Project Gutenberg's Poems: Three Series, Complete, by Emily Dickinson\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Title: Poems: Three Series, Complete\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Author: Emily Dickinson\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Release Date: May 3, 2004 [EBook #12242]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Language: English\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS: THREE SERIES, COMPLETE ***\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Produced by Jim Tinsley {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:jtinsley@pobox.com"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
jtinsley@pobox.com
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 POEMS\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 by EMILY DICKINSON\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Edited by two of her friends\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 MABEL LOOMIS TODD and T.W. HIGGINSON\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 PREFACE.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The verses of Emily Dickinson belong emphatically to what Emerson long since called "the Poetry of the Portfolio,"--something produced absolutely without the thought of publication, and solely by way of expression of the writer's own mind. Such verse must inevitably forfeit whatever advantage lies in the discipline of public criticism and the enforced conformity to accepted ways. On the other hand, it may often gain something through the habit of freedom and the unconventional utterance of daring thoughts. In the case of the present author, there was absolutely no choice in the matter; she must write thus, or not at all. A recluse by temperament and habit, literally spending years without setting her foot beyond the doorstep, and many more years during which her walks were strictly limited to her father's grounds, she habitually concealed her mind, like her person, from all but a very few friends; and it was with great difficulty that she was persuaded to print, during her lifetime, three or four poems. Yet she wrote verses in great abundance; and though brought curiously indifferent to all conventional rules, had yet a rigorous literary standard of her own, and often altered a word many times to suit an ear which had its own tenacious fastidiousness.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Miss Dickinson was born in Amherst, Mass., Dec. 10, 1830, and died there May 15, 1886. Her father, Hon. Edward Dickinson, was the leading lawyer of Amherst, and was treasurer of the well-known college there situated. It was his custom once a year to hold a large reception at his house, attended by all the families connected with the institution and by the leading people of the town. On these occasions his daughter Emily emerged from her wonted retirement and did her part as gracious hostess; nor would any one have known from her manner, I have been told, that this was not a daily occurrence. The annual occasion once past, she withdrew again into her seclusion, and except for a very few friends was as invisible to the world as if she had dwelt in a nunnery. For myself, although I had corresponded with her for many years, I saw her but twice face to face, and brought away the impression of something as unique and remote as Undine or Mignon or Thekla.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This selection from her poems is published to meet the desire of her personal friends, and especially of her surviving sister. It is believed that the thoughtful reader will find in these pages a quality more suggestive of the poetry of William Blake than of anything to be elsewhere found,--flashes of wholly original and profound insight into nature and life; words and phrases exhibiting an extraordinary vividness of descriptive and imaginative power, yet often set in a seemingly whimsical or even rugged frame. They are here published as they were written, with very few and superficial changes; although it is fair to say that the titles have been assigned, almost invariably, by the editors. In many cases these verses will seem to the reader like poetry torn up by the roots, with rain and dew and earth still clinging to them, giving a freshness and a fragrance not otherwise to be conveyed. In other cases, as in the few poems of shipwreck or of mental conflict, we can only wonder at the gift of vivid imagination by which this recluse woman can delineate, by a few touches, the very crises of physical or mental struggle. And sometimes again we catch glimpses of a lyric strain, sustained perhaps but for a line or two at a time, and making the reader regret its sudden cessation. But the main quality of these poems is that of extraordinary grasp and insight, uttered with an uneven vigor sometimes exasperating, seemingly wayward, but really unsought and inevitable. After all, when a thought takes one's breath away, a lesson on grammar seems an impertinence. As Ruskin wrote in his earlier and better days, "No weight nor mass nor beauty of execution can outweigh one grain or fragment of thought."\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 ---Thomas Wentworth Higginson\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 As is well documented, Emily Dickinson's poems were edited in these early editions by her friends, better to fit the conventions of the times. In particular, her dashes, often small enough to appear as dots, became commas and semi-colons.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In the second series of poems published, a facsimile of her handwritten poem which her editors titled "Renunciation" is given, and I here transcribe that manuscript as faithfully as I can, showing {\i underlined} words thus.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There came a day - at Summer's full -\line Entirely for me -\line I thought that such were for the Saints -\line Where Resurrections - be -\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The sun - as common - went abroad -\line The flowers - accustomed - blew,\line As if no soul - that solstice passed -\line Which maketh all things - new -\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The time was scarce profaned - by speech -\line The falling of a word\line Was needless - as at Sacrament -\line The {\i Wardrobe} - of our Lord!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Each was to each - the sealed church -\line Permitted to commune - {\i this} time -\line Lest we too awkward show\line At Supper of "the Lamb."\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The hours slid fast - as hours will -\line Clutched tight - by greedy hands -\line So - faces on two Decks look back -\line Bound to {\i opposing} lands.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 And so, when all the time had leaked,\line Without external sound,\line Each bound the other's Crucifix -\line We gave no other bond -\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Sufficient troth - that we shall {\i rise},\line Deposed - at length the Grave -\line To that new marriage -\line {\i Justified} - through Calvaries - of Love!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 From the handwriting, it is not always clear which are dashes, which are commas and which are periods, nor it is entirely clear which initial letters are capitalized.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, this transcription may be compared with the edited version in the main text to get a flavor of the changes made in these early editions.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 ---JT\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \f1 This is my letter to the world,\line
  That never wrote to me, --\line
The simple news that Nature told,\line
   With tender majesty.\line
\line
Her message is committed    \line
   To hands I cannot see;\line
For love of her, sweet countrymen,\line
   Judge tenderly of me!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 I. LIFE.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 I.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 SUCCESS.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 [Published in "A Masque of Poets"\line at the request of "H.H.," the author's\line fellow-townswoman and friend.]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Success is counted sweetest\line By those who ne'er succeed.\line To comprehend a nectar\line Requires sorest need.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Not one of all the purple host\line Who took the flag to-day\line Can tell the definition,\line So clear, of victory,\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 As he, defeated, dying,\line On whose forbidden ear\line The distant strains of triumph\line Break, agonized and clear!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 II.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Our share of night to bear,\line Our share of morning,\line Our blank in bliss to fill,\line Our blank in scorning.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Here a star, and there a star,\line Some lose their way.\line Here a mist, and there a mist,\line Afterwards -- day!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 III.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 ROUGE ET NOIR.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Soul, wilt thou toss again?\line By just such a hazard\line Hundreds have lost, indeed,\line But tens have won an all.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Angels' breathless ballot\line Lingers to record thee;\line Imps in eager caucus\line Raffle for my soul.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 IV.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 ROUGE GAGNE.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 'T is so much joy! 'T is so much joy!\line If I should fail, what poverty!\line And yet, as poor as I\line Have ventured all upon a throw;\line Have gained! Yes! Hesitated so\line This side the victory!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Life is but life, and death but death!\line Bliss is but bliss, and breath but breath!\line And if, indeed, I fail,\line At least to know the worst is sweet.\line Defeat means nothing but defeat,\line No drearier can prevail!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 And if I gain, -- oh, gun at sea,\line Oh, bells that in the steeples be,\line At first repeat it slow!\line For heaven is a different thing\line Conjectured, and waked sudden in,\line And might o'erwhelm me so!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 V.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Glee! The great storm is over!\line Four have recovered the land;\line Forty gone down together\line Into the boiling sand.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Ring, for the scant salvation!\line Toll, for the bonnie souls, --\line Neighbor and friend and bridegroom,\line Spinning upon the shoals!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 How they will tell the shipwreck\line When winter shakes the door,\line Till the children ask, "But the forty?\line Did they come back no more?"\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Then a silence suffuses the story,\line And a softness the teller's eye;\line And the children no further question,\line And only the waves reply.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VI.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 If I can stop one heart from breaking,\line I shall not live in vain;\line If I can ease one life the aching,\line Or cool one pain,\line Or help one fainting robin\line Unto his nest again,\line I shall not live in vain.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VII.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 ALMOST!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Within my reach!\line I could have touched!\line I might have chanced that way!\line Soft sauntered through the village,\line Sauntered as soft away!\line So unsuspected violets\line Within the fields lie low,\line Too late for striving fingers\line That passed, an hour ago.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VIII.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A wounded deer leaps highest,\line I've heard the hunter tell;\line 'T is but the ecstasy of death,\line And then the brake is still.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The smitten rock that gushes,\line The trampled steel that springs;\line A cheek is always redder\line Just where the hectic stings!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Mirth is the mail of anguish,\line In which it cautions arm,\line Lest anybody spy the blood\line And "You're hurt" exclaim!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 IX.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The heart asks pleasure first,\line And then, excuse from pain;\line And then, those little anodynes\line That deaden suffering;\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 And then, to go to sleep;\line And then, if it should be\line The will of its Inquisitor,\line The liberty to die.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 X.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 IN A LIBRARY.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A precious, mouldering pleasure 't is\line To meet an antique book,\line In just the dress his century wore;\line A privilege, I think,\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 His venerable hand to take,\line And warming in our own,\line A passage back, or two, to make\line To times when he was young.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 His quaint opinions to inspect,\line His knowledge to unfold\line On what concerns our mutual mind,\line The literature of old;\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 What interested scholars most,\line What competitions ran\line When Plato was a certainty.\line And Sophocles a man;\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When Sappho was a living girl,\line And Beatrice wore\line The gown that Dante deified.\line Facts, centuries before,\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 He traverses familiar,\line As one should come to town\line And tell you all your dreams were true;\line He lived where dreams were sown.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 His presence is enchantment,\line You beg him not to go;\line Old volumes shake their vellum heads\line And tantalize, just so.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XI.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Much madness is divinest sense\line To a discerning eye;\line Much sense the starkest madness.\line 'T is the majority\line In this, as all, prevails.\line Assent, and you are sane;\line Demur, -- you're straightway dangerous,\line And handled with a chain.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XII.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 I asked no other thing,\line No other was denied.\line I offered Being for it;\line The mighty merchant smiled.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Brazil? He twirled a button,\line Without a glance my way:\line "But, madam, is there nothing else\line That we can show to-day?"\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XIII.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 EXCLUSION.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The soul selects her own society,\line Then shuts the door;\line On her divine majority\line Obtrude no more.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Unmoved, she notes the chariot's pausing\line At her low gate;\line Unmoved, an emperor is kneeling\line Upon her mat.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 I've known her from an ample nation\line Choose one;\line Then close the valves of her attention\line Like stone.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XIV.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 THE SECRET.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Some things that fly there be, --\line Birds, hours, the bumble-bee:\line Of these no elegy.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Some things that stay there be, --\line Grief, hills, eternity:\line Nor this behooveth me.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There are, that resting, rise.\line Can I expound the skies?\line How still the riddle lies!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XV.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 THE LONELY HOUSE.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 I know some lonely houses off the road\line A robber 'd like the look of, --\line Wooden barred,\line And windows hanging low,\line Inviting to\line A portico,\line Where two could creep:\line One hand the tools,\line The other peep\line To make sure all's asleep.\line Old-fashioned eyes,\line Not easy to surprise!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 How orderly the kitchen 'd look by night,\line With just a clock, --\line But they could gag the tick,\line And mice won't bark;\line And so the walls don't tell,\line None will.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A pair of spectacles ajar just stir --\line An almanac's aware.\line Was it the mat winked,\line Or a nervous star?\line The moon slides down the stair\line To see who's there.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There's plunder, -- where?\line Tankard, or spoon,\line Earring, or stone,\line A watch, some ancient brooch\line To match the grandmamma,\line Staid sleeping there.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Day rattles, too,\line Stealth's slow;\line The sun has got as far\line As the third sycamore.\line Screams chanticleer,\line "Who's there?"\line And echoes, trains away,\line Sneer -- "Where?"\line While the old couple, just astir,\line Fancy the sunrise left the door ajar!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XVI.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 To fight aloud is very brave,\line But gallanter, I know,\line Who charge within the bosom,\line The cavalry of woe.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Who win, and nations do not see,\line Who fall, and none observe,\line Whose dying eyes no country\line Regards with patriot love.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We trust, in plumed procession,\line For such the angels go,\line Rank after rank, with even feet\line And uniforms of snow.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XVII.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 DAWN.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When night is almost done,\line And sunrise grows so near\line That we can touch the spaces,\line It 's time to smooth the hair\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 And get the dimples ready,\line And wonder we could care\line For that old faded midnight\line That frightened but an hour.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XVIII.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 THE BOOK OF MARTYRS.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Read, sweet, how others strove,\line Till we are stouter;\line What they renounced,\line Till we are less afraid;\line How many times they bore\line The faithful witness,\line Till we are helped,\line As if a kingdom cared!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Read then of faith\line That shone above the fagot;\line Clear strains of hymn\line The river could not drown;\line Brave names of men\line And celestial women,\line Passed out of record\line Into renown!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XIX.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 THE MYSTERY OF PAIN.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Pain has an element of blank;\line It cannot recollect\line When it began, or if there were\line A day when it was not.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 It has no future but itself,\line Its infinite realms contain\line Its past, enlightened to perceive\line New periods of pain.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XX.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 I taste a liquor never brewed,\line From tankards scooped in pearl;\line Not all the vats upon the Rhine\line Yield such an alcohol!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Inebriate of air am I,\line And debauchee of dew,\line Reeling, through endless summer days,\line From inns of molten blue.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When landlords turn the drunken bee\line Out of the foxglove's door,\line When butterflies renounce their drams,\line I shall but drink the more!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Till seraphs swing their snowy hats,\line And saints to windows run,\line To see the little tippler\line Leaning against the sun!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 XXI.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 A BOOK.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 He ate and drank the precious words,\line His spirit grew robust;\line He knew no more that he was poor,\line Nor that his frame was dust.\line He danced along the dingy days,\line And this bequest of wings\line Was but a book. What liberty\line A loosened spirit brings!\par}
